6, 2000, the anniversary of D-Day, at 529
Helena, and getting ready to chat with Mr. Fred
Nelson. Mr. Nelson, would you say a sentence or
two? Let's check your mic. Well, it's nice to have
you, and it's one of those things, like I said, I
feel flattered, you know, that you want me to
recount the days when I was a day in and out. All
right, sir. Nice to see you now.
Mr. Nelson, to begin with, please tell us about
your growing up. Where were you born? Where did you
go to school? What did your parents do for a living?
How long had they lived there? Well, we have some in
common that you may not know about or I may have told
you before, but I grew up in Collin County. My
parents were sharecropping people. And I grew up
on a farm in a community called Lovejoy. That's
where I went to school until the ninth grade. And in
those days, high school ended in the 11th grade. So
after finishing at Lovejoy, I then went to Boyd
High in McKinney, Texas, where I was graduated in
1930. And as you probably will recall, that the
beginning of the Great Depression was my era. And I
didn't particularly like farm work, so I went into
the music business, having been talented at
piano. We had little bands in high school. And from
that situation there, from having become a
musician, so to speak, I went on, and during the
Depression, I made whatever living I could from
playing around with different bands. So from
there, out of McKinney, I left somewhere probably
in the mid-30s and started out on the road with
various musical organizations from somewhere
maybe in the the area of the south to the east coast,
and halfway to the west coast from time to time with
the various types of bands.
What were the names of some of the bands you played
with? Well, one I can think of right offhand, we had
our own bands, you know, and we organized, but we
never did really have a name. until I'd say in the
mid-30s, I went with a band out of Waco called the
Joe Buzzy Band. B-U-Z-Z-E, Buzzy. And we toured
Texas on one-night stands, et cetera, et cetera.
And until about 1939, I got tired of that one night
stand thing and traveling over the state of Texas.
And so I left the organization and went to Fort
Worth where my sister and her husband lived. And
eventually I went into,
let's see, I've forgotten what the name, as I think
of it, general merchandising thing, you know.
Let's see what was the name. I couldn't remember
what the name was. You could probably remember the
name. There was a big organization there in Fort
Worth, and I worked. Leonard, was it Leonard
Brothers? It was Dawes Crossford Street from
Leonard's. You remember what? No, sir. I'll
remember it. Anyway, I went into the clothing
business, and so in 1940, I had a call from one of the
musicians that I played in a band with around
McKinney, and he wanted to know if I'd be
interested in coming to A&M and playing piano in
the Aggieland Orchestra. Well, having always
wanted to go to A&M, I guess you could say I might
have jumped at the chance. And as an aside, I also
had a chance at the same time to go with, at the
behest of another musician I worked with before,
to go to Texas Tech. So I was considering going to
Texas Tech and playing a band out there, or come to
A&M. So like I say, having always aspired to be an
Aggie, I chose to come to A&M, and I came here in
1940. Let me back up a little bit about your
parents.
Do you have any idea how many acres they farmed?
Yes, I think we had 140 some odd acres. And we farmed
cotton, corn, oats. You know, and sometimes we
tried wheat, but wheat didn't grow well in that
part of the country. Which of those was the most
profitable? Cotton? Cotton, probably so, yes.
Where did y'all gin it? In McKinney.
And was McKinney where you went to spend money, to
shop? Yes, uh-huh. McKinney, we were southeast of
McKinney about seven miles in a community called
Lovejoy. Also a little Baptist church called
Friendship where I was converted. And then there
was a funeral situation, a cemetery at Forest
Grove. And then between the two churches, Lovejoy
was on the farm road out there. Now what were your
duties on that farm? Well, I picked cotton,
gathered corn, and the usual things. But I had two
older brothers who did the plowing and managing
the livestock and that type of thing. And you all
plowed with mules, or did you have a tractor? With
mules. Tractors were a novel thing in those days.
And let's see, electricity, telephone? Well, we
had a community telephone. but no electricity,
you know, lamps, coal oil lamps, and eventually
you got one of those gas things, you know, the air
type thing. And where was your well, your water? We
had two wells, one for the stock at the farm on the,
you know, out around the barn area, and one near the
house, both of which finally went beyond the
depth, you know, water dropped off, you know. And
so we started having to haul water in. And we, there
was a creek near our place, near the community. Was
that Spring Creek or East Fork of the, or Rowlett
Creek? I believe it was probably East Fork. And
let's see. There's a After our water level dropped
below the level of our wells, there was a place down
on this what they call Wilson Creek. It had a well on
it. The water was practically to the top of the
ground. The water level there was so, I guess it was
feeding off that creek. So we used to haul, my dad
had a, a big tank made and put it on the wagon and we'd
go down there and draw water and haul it home and
that's what we used. That's how we kept water at the
house. And how did you get to school when you went
into McKinney? My dad had a car and I had two sisters
who were students at the time and one of my sisters
McKinney and they had, I don't know what it was,
to go to school. Oh, so you would go to town and spend
the night in town? No, we'd drive, oh, I would drive
the car, you know, and there was two or three guys
from Lovejoy there that went to McKinney and
really formed that, yeah. Where
did you learn to play the piano? Well, I started
sitting around... But
the piano, when I was
about
six or seven years old, I guess I had a natural
talent. And I just progressed from there. From
every year, I seemed to maybe improve a little bit
or learn a little bit of something. And I might say,
I have often said that I started playing the piano
when I was six. And I learned by myself. Although I
had older sisters. So
you didn't have any formal piano instruction? You
didn't? You never had a teacher outside the
family? Well, When
I was about
in, I guess, maybe the fourth or fifth grade, I had a
teacher who taught me for about three months. But
when the end of the school year, and when she came
out of my camp, you know, and goes out there to
teach. But when the school term ended, when I was
having my lessons with her, Did you
have a model? Who were you trying to play the piano
like? No, I
didn't have a, see, we didn't have a radio in that
place. And I used to,
did you ever hear a singing school? Well, we had a
singing school. And every year, this band was also
a community member, had a special community out of
a songbook. So I used to make those things. I guess I
might have been the one or two, if we haven't known
over a few years. And I may have learned some things
from doing that. So were you playing gospel music
first? Yes. Church music? Yes. But we didn't have a
radio, you know, so we didn't get the benefit of the
programs that were sent out over the radio. And
mainly I began to play songs in the songbook. And
I've never learned to read music. Did
you
ever use any of the Stamps Quartet music? Oh, yes.
There was another piano man in the community who
specialized in the Stamps Quartet music. And I
never tried to compete with him because I was more
inclined to the popper music. level of music than
otherwise. So when you finished high school, you
worked a little, and then you went on the road. And
about what year did you first go on the road? Let's
see. I was 30. I was 18. And I have to kind of recount
how far back I went on the road. I believe that my
first introduction to the popular music that I
learned was when Two friends of mine, one a country
man and the other a intersex man, we used to get
together and play. And I had little small bands and
we appeared in a little dance hall, you know, there
in McKinney for a while. Well, these two guys
belonged to the National Choir. And one summer, at
the county picnic, One of them, the trumpet man,
approached me and said, how would you like to go to
the National Guard training camp as a musician? So
my parents didn't want me to go. I was 16 at the time.
No, was I 16?
Yeah, I guess I was still in high school the first
time I went to National Guard. I was about 16, and I
went down there and played with the 16th police
officers. I couldn't read a note. I just had to go by
ear, you know, to find out what came next, so to
speak. And that was really my first introduction
to the big band.
And that National Guard thing only lasted two
weeks. I didn't join the National Guard. I was
going as a substitute for a man, a member of the band
in the National Guard who could not go. So they put
me into his team and so forth. Did y'all, was your
primary task to play for National Guard dances?
Yes, uh-huh. So y'all were not playing march
music? No, we weren't. Dance music? Yeah. Of
course, they had a band, you know, and these
people, the rest of the people were members of the
band, and this was kind of an offshoot of the band,
you know, various ones. Of course, they didn't
have a piano band, and they substituted me in
there. I don't know how it was expanded, but
anyway, I learned a lot from going back. I went to
three different years of camp in the National
Guard. ever worry about a young Baptist boy
playing dance music? I've never heard of it.
Nobody ever? When you went on the road with those
bands, do you remember some of the towns you all
went to? Uh, with Buzz's band, we'd go out into West
Texas, and, you know, they held rodeos. Sometimes
they had a three-day rodeo. So we'd book in for
three nights of dance. And, uh, I don't know. It was
very familiar. West Texas dance. There's not
anything out now that I can pull up, you know. About
how many were in his band? There was nine of us, I
believe, in that band, in Buzz's band. And, uh...
What did they play? What instruments? We probably
had three saxes, two or three trumpets, two
trombones, bass, piano, and drummer. And what
kind of music did you all play? We played, I guess,
the big band stuff. Do you remember how much pay you
got? Yeah, it was very little, about $5 an hour,
something like that. But that was pretty good pay,
though, for that era. Yeah. How did y'all travel?
The band leader owned the bus, and he drove it.
Although, finally, the bass man, yeah, the bass
man finally did the driving, you know, and they
swapped off. And one night, the bass man went down
in South Africa. We didn't play in a place. And we'd
move over to the next town where we'd go and check in
the motel about daylight. And then we'd stay there
all day, and then we'd see it at night. So it kind of
helped us out. So our extension was used up. But the
base man, he was down about two or three o'clock in
the morning. And he had some kind of stomach
problem. It required emergency treatment. And
they went to the hospital. So we put him in the
hospital. And I think he had to be in there several
days. But anyway, that's just one of the little
things that you put up with when you're out on the
road. Did y'all go out of state, or did you stay in
Texas? We stayed in Texas with that band. I had gone
to Durango, Colorado
with that band. A member of it, in that band, wanted
me to come to Texas. We stayed in Durango for about a
year, and then we came back to Texas.
What year
was it
that the man from A&M contacted you? 1940? So you
were how old then? I was born in 1912. Well, so you
were 28. And what was his name? Well, Murray Evans
was the guy who got me down there. I can't remember
the band leader's name. Excuse me. All these
things, of course, if you need to have that
information, you can get it in the yearbook. Yes.
How did you get to College Station? What did you
bring with you? Do you remember what it was? Well, I
came dressed in a suit. And as a matter of fact,
after about a day down here with Evan, he said to me,
you
know, Fred, I don't think you ought to come to New
York. I said, why not? Well, I didn't ask him that
right now, but I said, no, I've always wanted to go
to Indiana, and I'm going to stay. He said, if you
want to. So later on, he did tell me, he said, well,
you were dressed like you, you know, you'd given up
a good job, but probably hadn't the best clothes
on, you know. And all the guys in the band treated me
like I was, you know, maybe a junior or something.
Do
you remember
what your major was that freshman year? Well, I
started off with it. And
where did you, what dorm were you in? Here's what
happened. The guys, they would bring me down here,
you know. What
was the name? B-A-U-S-H-A-B-S-E-N.
Where was it? It was up on College Avenue over there
in that building. You may remember where they had
the hat shop over there. That used to be a student's
house. At that time, they didn't have enough
housing on the campus. And
you
know, the man that started that, the housing thing
out there, you know, they had about 14 of those
houses down in New Mexico. At the time when I came to
A&M, A&M was growing, and students were staying as
far away as they could in Caldwell and places like
that to be able to find a house to stay in. And they
commuted. And we commuted, but this one guy owned a
truck, a big bed on the back of it, and we used to ride
it, too, in that time. Now, as a freshman, you were
in the Corps of Cadets. No, I didn't get in because I
was old enough to decide not to. And besides, then
we had the Franks, you know, in the uniform. I came
down here, and I was 30 bucks in my pocket. And it was
all that wrecked the situation. If I had to depend
on my finances to keep a place to sleep, I could keep
it in the street. Having no one, you know. But the
books land, you know, in the chorus. There's
chorus out there for the chorus dancers, you know,
that . And then we play for the chorus dancers. So
we'd be playing maybe every Friday night. Where
were those dances held? In Sabisa. In Sabisa. And
so you were the pianist?
Yes, I was. Please try to recall as much as you can
the names of the people in the band when you joined
it. Well, you know, that's a long time ago. I
realize I can only remember... Maybe one man's
name. Who was it? That was the guy that got me down.
Oh, because he was from my hometown. I'd known him
for a long time. But in a 16 guy, you know, you don't
really know anybody's name very well. And did a
number of them live at the same place you did? No.
Actually, most of them were corpsmen. Okay. And,
you know, they played in the bands out there, you
know. Do
you remember how much did y'all get paid? I worked
in the English office one time for 25 cents an hour.
And you can see that if I got $5 a dance,
you know, those dances, well, I was, like you said,
you know, sometimes $5 or $500. Did you have to pay
rent at that boarding house? No,
I didn't. No. I had to pay for food. But it was more or
less a kind of a reason. It was kind of a favorite
deal of ours. They had had two piano men before me,
maybe more, I know more than that. They were
brothers. And one played during history, and then
the other kept away. And then they didn't have
anybody else, so that's when they got me. And they
were very, that's tenuous, because piano men are
hard to come by. Now, how did you move the piano
around? Well, we played it. And so there was a piano
there. Now, when did you go over there to practice?
How often? I think we rehearsed Monday. I can't
remember whether it was Thursday or Tuesday
night. Glenn
Miller, Benny Goodman.
Y'all were most similar to which one of them?
Probably more like Ben Miller. We played most of
his songs. And then Benny Goodman and the two
brothers, Tommy Dorothy and his brother Jimmy,
all of
them played about the same kind of music. So we kind
of played that kind of thing. And I can tell you
about this. There
used to be something called a six-band night. And
they'd go out and see who was most wanted right
there. So we got the four students that they knew.
They had a show once a week called the six-band
night. And they picked up bands from around the
world. It seemed to be the top of the class. Do you
remember
what year that was? It's probably 41. And where in
Dallas did y'all play? Was it one of the big hotels?
Yes, I think it was in Dallas. That's
A-D-O-L-P-H-U-S. Adolphus. But most of us always
say Dolphus.
What
did you all wear when you were playing? Suit. But
was it a coat and tie? Yeah. We didn't have a uniform
on. did did and you always call the group the aggie
land orchestra yeah and
about would you do one average one a concert a week
or twice? No, usually it's one a week because, you
know, the chorus, the chorus, people would have
their own dances planned. And they'd have their
girlfriends come down. At that time, we had a
railroad theater. And about 6 o'clock in the
afternoon on Friday, they'd go down to the railway
station and meet their girls and sing. And
generally, I would say they had already booked
them.
How did Aggies and their dates behave at those
bands at those dances? Well, you know, that was
when we had those wild dances, you know, and most
everybody did. Jitterbug. Yeah. But though Did
they ever get out of line? Did the Aggies
misbehave? No, not ever. We didn't have any
trouble at all. And the young ladies, what did they
wear to the dances?
as i guess you expect them to you know coming this
far you know just because it's a special occasion
in their lives they came down from the girls
college in tscw yeah cia at first yeah that's right
yeah yeah well they'd come down you know i guess
they'd get together up there and they Now
when y'all, when the Aggieland Orchestra went
somewhere out of town, how did y'all get there?
During the Christmas season, our band leader
would book dances all over the hometown And we used
to play every night somewhere. We'd start out in
San Angelo and go out to Lagos and that big spring
and Odessa and all these towns in between and we'd
just kind of make a circle.
If it was too far, we'd have some other kind of
arrangement. The mother's club had arranged to
bed the guys, you know, in various homes.